The training of a surgeon includes the acquisition of a number of
characteristics. These include a cognitive knowledge base,
problem formulation and decisionmaking abilities, appropriate
psychosocial relationships, and other attributes that can be
measured with objective testing, such as national board or
specialty certifying examinations. Perhaps most critical to the
surgeon, however, are the core technical skills of the
profession. A battery of sophisticated devices is being created
to teach and provide objective evaluations of the trainee's
technical abilities. These innovative state-of-the-art
simulation devices, used to teach basic skills and surgical
tasks through repetitive proctored challenges, will enable
detection and analysis of surgical errors and near miss
incidents without risk to patients. As with flight simulation,
near miss detection capabilities anticipate potential errors
before they occur and prevent resulting complications. In
collaboration with a number of otolaryngology residency
programs, we have developed a comprehensive training curriculum,
based on complementary simulation tools and several perceptual
and spatial ability test instruments, to provide objective
metrics for assessing the technical skills of trainees. These
tools include an endoscopic sinus surgery simulator for
procedural training, and the Minimally Invasive Surgical
Trainer-Virtual Reality (MIST-VR) system for basic surgical
skills training. Technical errors are identified, quantified,
and used to monitor surgical performance, after which the
metrics are used for outcome analysis, for the purpose of
improving patient safety. Validated metrics include
time-to-completion, errors, economy of motion, and psychomotor
tracking. Endoscopic sinus surgery is a suitable operation
substrate, since it is a frequently performed procedure (more
than 300,000 times annually in the United States.) and carries a
significant risk of injury to the delicate neighboring eye and
brain structures. The endoscopic sinus surgery simulator (ES3)
is an advanced surgical simulation device based largely on jet
pilot flight simulation, and provides the trainee with
appropriate levels of challenge and instruction. ES3 validation
studies are reported here, along with a description of the World
Wide Web-based Intelligent Information Interface (WI3)
simulation database.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21250030